The Ushads
We are
The Abbegelli Ushad
And we've been working on a project called
The Myths and Legends of North Wales
Because guess what?
Abbegelli is in North Wales, duh!
Yeah, and in North Wales we have the best stories
So now we are going to tell you the traditional story of Rhys and Maynia
A dark and twisted tale
And then afterwards
We will tell you
Our own special version of the story of Rhys and Maynia
An even darker and twisted tale
Erm, sorry, there's no such word as twisted-er
Okay, an even more dark and twisted tale
So, first of all, Rhys and Maynia, the traditional version
Once upon a time, in a beautiful little village called Porthonantyn Gwynedd
In a small valley at the foot of a mountain
Beside the sea, there lived two cousins, Rhys and Maynia
They were childhood sweethearts
Will you be my sweetheart, Rhys?
Yes, if you will be mine
Their favourite place to meet was under an ancient oak tree at the foot of a mountain
One day, meeting up with the old oak, they decided to get married
Will you marry me, Rhys?
Thought you'd never ask
Hang on a minute
Cousins aren't supposed to marry each other, are they?
I mean, look at the Hasbigs
Who?
They were like this royal family
Ruled Austria, Germany and the Holy Roman Empire for centuries
Kept marrying their cousins
And because of all the inbreeding, ended up looking really weird
With weird sticky-out eyes, weird sticky-out noses and weird sticky-out jaws
We would
OK, maybe Rhys and Maynia weren't cousins then
It's only a legend, we can change it
But they definitely decided to get married
In Clannog Church
That's a real church, you can go there, big one, quite fancy, posh
In Rhys and Maynia's village, there was this old tradition
Whenever there was a wedding, the bride would get ready in her bridal dress
Then run off and hide somewhere
The bride groom would wait in the church
And all the guests would go and look for the bride
And find her and bring her back to the church
Like hide and seek for grown-ups
So, on the big day, Mayna got ready in her bridal dress
Then off went Rhys to the church
And off went Mayna to hide
And off the guests went to look for her
Leaving only the priest in the church
With the excited bride groom
I can't wait for her to come through those doors
My heart is racing
I've got her a flower, a wildflower
She'll like that
Rhys waited and waited
And waited
They're taking a long time, aren't they, Father Brynne?
Something must have happened
Perhaps she's got lost
I'm sure they'll find her soon
Let's take it forever
The flower is wilting
At last
There's my best man, Tom Ross
My other friend, Godric
Mayna's mam
All the other guests
But...
No Mayna?
Where is she?
Please, we can't find her
We've looked everywhere
On the beach
Around by the dock
Up on the mountain
Even in the forest
We've done everything we could to find her
But she's just...
Vanished
My lovely daughter
Missing
It's freezing our thirties
And you can barely see
I'm so sorry, Rhys
But I think the wedding's off
Maybe she's run away
A cold feet
No, she'd never do that
She'd never abandon me
She's lost
Or hurt
That's the only possible explanation
Yes
That's it
She's had an accident
I'm going to go and look for her myself
So the wedding can go on
Yes
Do please keep looking for her, Rhys
Though, even if you find her now
It's a bit late for me to marry you today
It'll have to be next week
Don't get your hopes up, Rhys
We've looked for well
It feels like hours
And there's no sign of her at all
You don't understand what it's like to really love someone
Do you, Thomas?
I'm going to look for her
And I'm going to go on looking until I find her
And that's what he did
Rhys looked for Mania for the rest of the day
And for many days after that
And for many weeks
And for many months
I will never give up
God
If you'll only bring her back to me
I'll go to the church every week
And help Father Bryn with the Sunday school for the rest of my days
I promise
Just help me to find her again
But Rhys never did find Mania
And slowly, slowly
He went mad with grief
One day when Rhys was wandering round the mountain looking for Mania
A terrible storm blew up
He took shelter by his and Mania's favourite old oak tree
While he was sheltering
Lightning hit the tree
BOOM
And the tree split open
To reveal inside
A skeleton dressed in what was left of a wedding gown
Bones
Just bones
And a little piece of her dress
Mania had hidden in the old oak
She wheezed it in through a tiny crack
And then got stuck
She starved to death, poor Mania
Poor Rhys
For the story has it
That Rhys then also died of a broken heart
Well, we told you it was a dark and twisted tale
But if you think that was dark and twisted
Wait until you get a load of our version of the story
Here we go
Rhys and Mania
The Abigail Youth Shag Gothic version
So, in our version
The real truth behind the story is that
Rhys and Mania
Are the real truth behind the story
And the real truth behind the story
The real version, the real truth behind the legend is
That Mania had fallen in love with Rhys' best friend, Thomas
And they were having a sneaky affair
The day before the wedding
They met up in Thomas' cottage
For what was supposed to be the last time
Oh, what am I going to do, Tom?
I just don't want to marry him anymore
Then don't
Run away with me instead
But it's tomorrow
I can't let him down
Let the whole village down
Yes, you can
You don't love him
You love me
Run away with me, Mania
I can't, he loves me
And you know Rhys
If I disappear
He'll come looking for me
And he'll never stop
He'll go on and on
Until he finds me
Finds us
What if we were to get on a boat?
Go and live in some other country
He'll follow me wherever I go
Oh, I wish I could die
Did you say die?
Hang on a minute
I think I have an idea
That night
If you were to pass through the graveyard of Clunagh Church
You would have seen a very strange sight
I'm not sure I can go through with this, Tom
Do you want to go home?
No, but I feel really bad about this
It's not exactly ethical, is it?
What we're doing?
It's the only way
All right, this is really what it takes
Pass me the lantern
Hey, this is my father's grave
You always hated him
Revenge at last
What?
Don't be dumb, Mania
It needs to be a woman
Don't call me dumb
And aren't men's and women's skeletons the same?
No, they're completely different
Well, I didn't know that
How would I know that?
Just start looking for a woman's grave
We just split up in case we call
Easier to find a convincing excuse if it's just one of us
Yeah, what convincing excuse would that be?
Here, what about this one with all the flowers?
Jackpot, pass me the shovel
What's that?
Oh no, Tom, someone's coming
Must be Father Brent
Quick, behind the graveyard, hide
That was a close shave
Or a close grave
I love your jokes, Tom, but not now
Who's there?
Oh no, it wasn't the priest, it's
Godric
Tom, what the hell are you doing?
You're digging up a grave?
We'd better come clean
We've been having a secret affair behind Reacher's back
And now we're digging up a body
So we can fake Maynard's death
So she doesn't have to marry him
We're going to hide the body in this stupid old oak tree
So we won't find it for a while
That'll explain why it's all rotted away
By then we'll be far away, married
Epic plan
You can turn us in now
Turn you in? No way
Anything, just right, Elise
I've always hated him
Give me the shovel
I'll dig up this body for you in no time
Tom, I think I've hit the coffin
OK, we need to lift out
Oh wow, it's heavy, I thought
Right, let's pry this open
Have to wedge the shovel
Into the space
Put some mud in the bottom
Get on with it
We haven't got all night
There it is, one skeleton
Yuck
Lift it out quick and shove it in the sack
What if they realise it's missing?
We need to put the coffin back and fill the hole in
Really? We'll be here all night
Just fill it in Godric
The next day, Meenir got dressed in her bridal finery
And went running off, as she told the wedding guests, to hide
In fact, she ran as fast as she could to Tom's cottage
Meanwhile, Rhys, the proud groom, stood waiting in the church
As Tom, Godric and the other wedding guests
Set off on a traditional search for the bride
I can't wait for us to come through those doors
My heart is racing
I've got a flower, a wild flower
She'll like that
But really, Tom and Godric secretly headed at top speed to Tom's cottage
To meet Meenir there
Quick, we haven't much time
Meenir, get your dress off
Turn you back, Godric
Godric, where's the sack?
I've got it here
Tip it out then
OK, let's get the dress on the skeleton, head first
That's not the head hole, Godric, that's an arm hole
How would I know?
Now you're putting it on backwards
Oh no, the skeleton's falling to bits
How are we going to put that lot back together?
Just have to try, Godric, pass me that leg
Sometime later, Meenir, dressed in her ordinary clothes
Secretly slipped away to start her new life
While Thomas and Godric rejoined the other guests and headed for the church
Rhys, we can't find her
We've looked everywhere, on the beach, round by the dock
Up on the mountain, even in the forest
We've done everything we could to find her, but she's just vanished
My lovely daughter, missing
It's freezing out there, Rhys, and you can barely see
I'm so sorry, Rhys, but I think the wedding's off
Maybe she's run away, like a cold feet
No, she'd never do that, she'd never abandon me
She's lost, or hurt
That's the only possible explanation
I'm going to go and look for her myself
So the wedding can go on
Don't get your hopes up, Rhys, we've looked for...
Well, it feels like hours, and there's no sign of her at all
You don't understand what it's like to really love someone, do you, Thomas?
Hmm, little does he know
I'm going to look for her, and I'm going to go on looking until I find her
And offset Rhys on his hopeless search
Two days later, having secretly planted the skeleton in the oak tree
Thomas announced to Rhys that he'd found a new job
and left the village to join Mania in a hotel in Rhyl
And Rhys carried on looking and gradually went mad
until the day he eventually found the skeleton he thought was Mania's in the tray
And Godric never said a word
And Mania and Thomas lived happily ever after
In Rhyl
And that is our version of the story of Rhys and Mania
Choose to believe whichever one you write
But we think the one that's the most fun is the one by the...
Abigail Ushad! Yes!
We are...
Ushad!